# robotino4-ros2
This repository contains several ROS 2 packages designed to work with the Robotino 4 robot. It provides a variety of functionalities ranging from describing the robot in URDF to control and path planning, as well as map creation and environment localization. Additionally, it includes nodes for interacting with the real robot via a REST API.

## Instalation of Required Resources:
To install the necessary resources for working with this repository and the omni-roobot-gui repository, follow these steps:

1. **Download the install_resources.sh Script:**

   You can do this using wget

   ```bash
   wget https://github.com/evillalbaa/robotino4-ros2/raw/main/install_resources.sh
   ```

2. **Grand Execution Permissions:**
   
   Before executing the script, you need to grant execution permissions.

   ```bash
   chmod +x install_resources.sh
   ```

3. **Execute the script:**
   
   Run the script to automate the installation process. This script handles downloading the repository, creating the ROS workspace, and installing necessary programs and packages.

   ```bash
   ./install_resources.sh
   ```
   
## Included Packages:

### 1. robotino_description

This package contains the URDF model of the Robotino robot. It also includes a launch file to visualize the robot in RViz.

#### Usage Instructions:

To launch the robot model in RViz, execute the following command:

```bash
ros2 launch robotino_description display.launch.xml
```

### 2. robotino_bringup 

This package contains two launch files to spawn the Robotino robot in Gazebo with ros_planar_move plugin and visualize it in RViz. One of this launch file is for spawn the robot in an empty Gazebo world. An the other one spwan the robot in a turtlebot3 world.

#### Usage Instructions:

To launch the robot in a empty Gazebo world and visualize it in RViz, execute one of the two following commands:

```bash
ros2 launch robotino_bringup robotino_gazebo_rviz.launch.xml
```

```bash
ros2 launch robotino_bringup robotino_gazebo_rviz.launch.py
```

To launch the robot in a Gazebo world and visualize it in RViz:

```bash
ros2 launch robotino_bringup robotino_world.xml
``` 

To control the robot's wheels:

```bash
ros2 run teleop_twist_keyboard teleop_twist_keyboard
```

### 3. cartographer_slam & map_server 

The **cartographer_slam** package facilitates the creation of a map for the robot's surrounding environment, while the **map_server** package aids in visualizing the map generated by cartographer.

#### Usage Instructions:

To launch cartographer, execute the folowing command:

```bash
ros2 launch cartographer_slam cartographer.launch.py
``` 

To create the map, move the robot around until the map appears correctly in RViz. To control the robot's movement, use the following command in a separate terminal:

```bash
ros2 run teleop_twist_keyboard teleop_twist_keyboard
``` 

Once the map is satisfactorily generated, execute the following command to save it:

```bash
cd ~/robotino4-ros2/src/cartographer_slam/config
ros2 run nav2_map_server map_saver_cli -f turtlebot_area
``` 

The saving command will generate two files:

- **tutlebot_area.pgm** image file is the map as an occupancy grid image.
- **turtlebot_area.yaml** file contains details about the resolution of the map.

To verify the successful generation of the map, launch the map server using

```bash
ros2 launch map_server nav2_map_server.launch.py
``` 

### 4. localization_server

The **localization_server** packages is designed to localize the robot, providing its precise position and orientation within the environment.

#### Usage Instructions:

Executed the following commands:

```bash
ros2 launch robotino_bringup robotino_world.xml
``` 

```bash
ros2 launch localization_server localization.launch.py
``` 

In RViz, save the initial pose using the "2D Estimate Pose" tool located in the toolbar above.

If you want to control de robot movement: 

```bash
ros2 run teleop_twist_keyboard teleop_twist_keyboard
```

### 5. path_planner

The **path_planner** packages move the robot from Point A to Point B, avoiding the obstacles along the map we have generated. It leverages the Dijkstra algorithm for path planning. 

#### Usage Instructions:

Executed the following commands:

1. Start the localization server:

```bash
ros2 launch localization_server localization.launch.py
``` 

2. Launch the robot simulation environment using:

```bash
ros2 launch robotino_bringup robotino_world.xml
``` 

4. In RViz, save the initial pose using the "2D Estimate Pose" tool located in the toolbar above.

5. Launch the path planner server:

```bash
ros2 launch path_planner_server pathplanner.launch.py
``` 

6. In RViz, put a gol pose with "2D Goal Pose" tool locatedd in the toolbar above. 

### 6. robotino_rest_node

This package contains two nodes for interacting with the Robotino robot via a REST API.

- **robotino_bumper**: This node reads the state of the robot's bumper via the REST API and publishes the data on the "bumper" topic. It also prints the data to the terminal.

- **robotino_omnidrive**: This node subscribes to the "cmd_vel" topic to receive velocity commands and sends them to the Robotino robot via the REST API.

#### Usage Instructions:

To run the `robotino_bumper` node, use the following command:

```bash
ros2 run robotino_rest_node robotino_bumper
```

To subscribe to the "bumper" topic and view bumper data, use the following command:

```bash
ros2 topic echo bumper
```

To run the `robotino_omnidrive` node, use the following command:
```bash
ros2 run robotino_rest_node robotino_omnidrive
```

To send velocity commands to the robotino via the "cmd_vel" topic, use the following command:
```bash
ros2 topic pub /cmd_vel geometry_msgs/msg/Twist '{linear: {x: 0.1, y: 0.0, z: 0.0}, angular: {x: 0.0, y: 0.0, z: 0.0}}' -r 10
```
